README.md, before:

[![Python tests](https://github.com/GabrielMartinMoran/pymodelio/actions/workflows/python.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/GabrielMartinMoran/pymodelio/actions/workflows/python.yml)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/GabrielMartinMoran/pymodelio/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=VVKW3GDMLD)](https://codecov.io/gh/GabrielMartinMoran/pymodelio)

# pymodelio

A simple Python module for performing model validations

## How to use the module

### Declaring the models

```py
import uuid
from typing import List

from pymodelio import pymodelio_model, Attribute, UNDEFINED
from pymodelio.validators import Validator, IntValidator, IterableValidator


@pymodelio_model
class Component:
    __serial_no: Attribute[str](default_factory=lambda: uuid.uuid4().__str__())

    @property
    def serial_no(self) -> str:
        return self.__serial_no


@pymodelio_model
class CPU(Component):
    frequency: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator())
    cores: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator())

    @staticmethod
    def from_dict(data: dict, auto_validate: bool = True) -> 'CPU':
        return CPU(
            frequency=data.get('frequency'),
            cores=data.get('cores'),
            auto_validate=auto_validate
        )


@pymodelio_model
class RAM(Component):
    frequency: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator())
    size: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator())

    @staticmethod
    def from_dict(data: dict, auto_validate: bool = True) -> 'RAM':
        return RAM(
            frequency=data.get('frequency'),
            size=data.get('size'),
            auto_validate=auto_validate
        )


@pymodelio_model
class Disk(Component):
    size: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator())

    @staticmethod
    def from_dict(data: dict, auto_validate: bool = True) -> 'Disk':
        return Disk(
            size=data.get('size'),
            auto_validate=auto_validate
        )


@pymodelio_model
class Computer(Component):
    _cpu: Attribute[CPU](validator=Validator(expected_type=CPU))
    _rams: Attribute[List[RAM]](validator=IterableValidator(elements_type=RAM))
    _disks: Attribute[List[Disk]](validator=IterableValidator(elements_type=Disk))

    @property
    def cpu(self) -> CPU:
        return self._cpu

    @property
    def rams(self) -> List[RAM]:
        return self._rams

    @property
    def disks(self) -> List[Disk]:
        return self._disks

    @staticmethod
    def from_dict(data: dict, auto_validate: bool = True) -> 'Computer':
        return Computer(
            serial_no=data.get('serial_no') if 'serial_no' in data else UNDEFINED,
            cpu=CPU.from_dict(data.get('cpu'), auto_validate=False),
            rams=[RAM.from_dict(x, auto_validate=False) for x in data.get('rams')],
            disks=[Disk.from_dict(x, auto_validate=False) for x in data.get('disks')],
            auto_validate=auto_validate
        )
```

### Using this specific models

```py
computer = Computer.from_dict({
    'serial_no': '123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000',
    'cpu': {
        'frequency': 3500,
        'cores': 8
    },
    'rams': [
        {
            'frequency': 1600,
            'size': 8
        },
        {
            'frequency': 1800,
            'size': 16
        }
    ],
    'disks': [
        {
            'size': 1024
        },
        {
            'size': 512
        }
    ]
})
```

### Customizing the models initialization workflow

```py
@pymodelio_model
class Model:
    model_attr: Attribute[str]

    @classmethod
    def __before_init__(cls, *args, **kwargs) -> None:
        # This method is called before everything when the model constructor is called
        # It receives the same parameters the constructor gets
        pass

    @classmethod
    def __before_validate__(cls) -> None:
        # This method is called after initializing the model attributes but just before
        # performing the model validations (it will be executed even if 
        # auto_validate = False)
        pass

    @classmethod
    def __once_validated__(cls) -> None:
        # This method is called just after performing the model validations initializing
        # the model attributes but before performing the model validations (it will be
        # executed even if auto_validate = False)
        pass
```

### Not initable attributes

```py
@pymodelio_model
class Model:
    non_initable_model_attr: Attribute[str](initable=False, default_factory=lambda: 'Non initable default value')


# WARNING: This will raise a NameError('non_initable_model_attr attribute is not
#          initable for class Model')
Model(non_initable_model_attr='custom value')


```

## Considerations

When a class attribute has the annotation `Attribute[<type>]`, it will be transformed into an instance attribute during
the model initialization.

When defining a protected or private model attribute with underscore or double underscore respectively, if that property
can be set by the model constructor, it's value will be obtained from an attribute with the same name but without
underscores. For instance:

```py
@pymodelio_model
class Component:
    __serial_no: Attribute[str]
    _model_name: Attribute[str]

    @property
    def serial_no(self) -> str:
        return self.__serial_no

    @property
    def model_name(self) -> str:
        return self._model_name


component = Component(serial_no='123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000', model_name='ABC123')

print(component.serial_no)  # It will print '123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000'
print(component.model_name)  # It will print 'ABC123'
```

## Available validators

### Validator

A generic validator for any type passed by parameter. It is also capable of validating other models. Validated value
must implement `validate` method in order to be considered a model by this validator.
Other validators inherit from this one.

```py
Validator(expected_type: Union[type, List[type]] = None, nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

### StringValidator

```py
StringValidator(min_len: Optional[int] = None, max_len: Optional[int] = None, fixed_len: Optional[int] = None, regex:
Optional[str] = None, nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

### NumericValidator

```py
NumericValidator(expected_type: type, min_value: Optional[Number] = None, max_value: Optional[
    Number] = None, expected_type: Union[type, List[type]] = None, nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[
    str] = None)
```

### IntValidator

A subclass of NumericValidator specific for integers.

```py
IntValidator(min_value: Optional[int] = None, max_value: Optional[int] = None, nullable: bool = False, message:
Optional[str] = None)
```

### FloatValidator

A subclass of NumericValidator specific for float numbers.

```py
FloatValidator(min_value: Optional[float] = None, max_value: Optional[float] = None, nullable: bool = False, message:
Optional[str] = None)
```

### DatetimeValidator

```py
DatetimeValidator(nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

### DictValidator

```py
DictValidator(nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

### IterableValidator

A validator for an of any type that allows nested models. Validated children must implement `validate` method in
order to be considered a model by this validator.

```py
IterableValidator(expected_type: Union[type, List[type]] = None, elements_type: Union[
    type, List[type]] = None, allow_empty: bool = True, nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

### ListValidator

A subclass of IterableValidator specific for lists.

```py
ListValidator(elements_type: Union[type, List[type]] = None, allow_empty: bool = True, nullable: bool = False, message:
Optional[str] = None)
```

### EmailValidator

```py
EmailValidator(nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

### BoolValidator

```py
BoolValidator(nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

## Serialization

pymodelio models implement a `to_dict()` method that serializes the public attributes and properties (defined using
the `property` decorator). For the example at the beginning of this documentation, calling `to_dict()` method in a
computer's instance returns something like:

```py
{
    'cpu': {
        'cores': 8,
        'frequency': 3500,
        'serial_no': '0f3b6ef1-dea3-4cdd-be53-ef85079731c4'
    },
    'disks': [
        {
            'serial_no': '011639e0-82dd-44c0-ba46-3580482c0add',
            'size': 1024
        },
        {
            'serial_no': 'd76474eb-b854-49d1-a0df-917fe8526621',
            'size': 512
        }
    ],
    'rams': [
        {
            'frequency': 1600,
            'serial_no': '8a2639e0-aa0c-450a-8ee1-8dd536578bb8',
            'size': 8
        },
        {
            'frequency': 1800,
            'serial_no': '49140714-263e-4fbb-b366-06916c4e81f5',
            'size': 16
        }
    ],
    'serial_no': 'computer-001'
}
```

## Let's compare the same code using raw python against using pymodelio

### Using raw python

```py
class RawPythonChildModel:

    def __int__(self, public_child_attr: int) -> None:
        self.public_child_attr = public_child_attr
        self.validate()

    def validate(self) -> None:
        assert isinstance(self.public_child_attr, int), 'public_child_attr is not a valid int'


class RawPythonModel:
    _PUBLIC_ATTR_MIN_VALUE = 0
    _PUBLIC_ATTR_MAX_VALUE = 0

    _PROTECTED_ATTR_FIXED_LENGTH = 5
    _PROTECTED_ATTR_REGEX = '^[A-Z]+$'  # Only capitalized chars

    def __init__(self, public_attr: int, protected_attr: str, private_attr: datetime,
                 child_model_attr: RawPythonChildModel, children_model_attr: List[RawPythonChildModel],
                 optional_attr: dict = None) -> None:
        self.public_attr = public_attr
        self._protected_attr = protected_attr
        self.__private_attr = private_attr
        self.child_model_attr = child_model_attr
        self.children_model_attr = children_model_attr
        self.optional_attr = {} if optional_attr is None else optional_attr
        self.non_initable_attr = []
        self.validate()

    def validate(self) -> None:
        assert isinstance(self.public_attr, int), 'public_child_attr is not a valid int'
        assert self.public_attr >= self._PUBLIC_ATTR_MIN_VALUE,
        f'public_child_attr is lower than {self._PUBLIC_ATTR_MIN_VALUE}'

    assert self.public_attr <= self._PUBLIC_ATTR_MAX_VALUE,
    f'public_child_attr is greater than {self._PUBLIC_ATTR_MAX_VALUE}'


assert isinstance(self._protected_attr, str), '_protected_attr is not a valid str'
assert len(self._protected_attr) == self._PROTECTED_ATTR_FIXED_LENGTH,
f'_protected_attr length is different than {self._PROTECTED_ATTR_FIXED_LENGTH}'
assert re.compile(self._PROTECTED_ATTR_REGEX).match(self._protected_attr) is not None,
'_protected_attr does not match configured regex'

assert isinstance(self.child_model_attr, RawPythonChildModel),
'child_model_attr is not a valid RawPythonChildModel'
self.child_model_attr.validate()

assert isinstance(self.children_model_attr, list), 'children_model_attr is not a valid list'
for child_model in self.children_model_attr:
    child_model.validate()

assert isinstance(self.__private_attr, datetime), '__private_attr is not a valid datetime'

assert isinstance(self.optional_attr, dict), 'optional_attr is not a valid dict'
```

### Using pymodelio

pymodelio model validation errors also give more information about the full path of nested structures. In case of lists,
including the index of the list element where the error occurred.

```py
@pymodelio_model
class PymodelioChildModel:
    public_child_attr: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator())


@pymodelio_model
class PymodelioModel:
    public_attr: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator(min_value=0, max_value=10))
    _protected_attr: Attribute[str](validator=StringValidator(fixed_len=5, regex='^[A-Z]+$'))  # Only capitalized chars
    __private_attr: Attribute[datetime](validator=DatetimeValidator())
    child_model_attr: Attribute[PymodelioChildModel](validator=Validator(expected_type=PymodelioChildModel))
    children_model_attr: Attribute[List[PymodelioChildModel]](
        validator=ListValidator(elements_type=PymodelioChildModel))
    optional_attr: Attribute[dict](validator=DictValidator())
    non_initable_attr: Attribute[List[str]](initable=False, default_factory=list)
```

Commit message:

Updated decorators and base model

README.md, after:

[![Python tests](https://github.com/GabrielMartinMoran/pymodelio/actions/workflows/python.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/GabrielMartinMoran/pymodelio/actions/workflows/python.yml)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/GabrielMartinMoran/pymodelio/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=VVKW3GDMLD)](https://codecov.io/gh/GabrielMartinMoran/pymodelio)

# pymodelio

A simple Python module for performing model validations

## How to use the module

### Declaring the models

```py
import uuid
from typing import List

from pymodelio import pymodelio_model, Attribute, UNDEFINED
from pymodelio.validators import Validator, IntValidator, IterableValidator


@pymodelio_model
class Component:
    __serial_no: Attribute[str](default_factory=lambda: uuid.uuid4().__str__())

    @property
    def serial_no(self) -> str:
        return self.__serial_no


@pymodelio_model
class CPU(Component):
    frequency: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator())
    cores: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator())

    @staticmethod
    def from_dict(data: dict, auto_validate: bool = True) -> 'CPU':
        return CPU(
            frequency=data.get('frequency'),
            cores=data.get('cores'),
            auto_validate=auto_validate
        )


@pymodelio_model
class RAM(Component):
    frequency: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator())
    size: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator())

    @staticmethod
    def from_dict(data: dict, auto_validate: bool = True) -> 'RAM':
        return RAM(
            frequency=data.get('frequency'),
            size=data.get('size'),
            auto_validate=auto_validate
        )


@pymodelio_model
class Disk(Component):
    size: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator())

    @staticmethod
    def from_dict(data: dict, auto_validate: bool = True) -> 'Disk':
        return Disk(
            size=data.get('size'),
            auto_validate=auto_validate
        )


@pymodelio_model
class Computer(Component):
    _cpu: Attribute[CPU](validator=Validator(expected_type=CPU))
    _rams: Attribute[List[RAM]](validator=IterableValidator(elements_type=RAM))
    _disks: Attribute[List[Disk]](validator=IterableValidator(elements_type=Disk))

    @property
    def cpu(self) -> CPU:
        return self._cpu

    @property
    def rams(self) -> List[RAM]:
        return self._rams

    @property
    def disks(self) -> List[Disk]:
        return self._disks

    @staticmethod
    def from_dict(data: dict, auto_validate: bool = True) -> 'Computer':
        return Computer(
            serial_no=data.get('serial_no') if 'serial_no' in data else UNDEFINED,
            cpu=CPU.from_dict(data.get('cpu'), auto_validate=False),
            rams=[RAM.from_dict(x, auto_validate=False) for x in data.get('rams')],
            disks=[Disk.from_dict(x, auto_validate=False) for x in data.get('disks')],
            auto_validate=auto_validate
        )
```

### Using these specific models

```py
computer = Computer.from_dict({
    'serial_no': '123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000',
    'cpu': {
        'frequency': 3500,
        'cores': 8
    },
    'rams': [
        {
            'frequency': 1600,
            'size': 8
        },
        {
            'frequency': 1800,
            'size': 16
        }
    ],
    'disks': [
        {
            'size': 1024
        },
        {
            'size': 512
        }
    ]
})
```

### Customizing the model's initialization workflow

```py
@pymodelio_model
class Model:
    model_attr: Attribute[str]

    @classmethod
    def __before_init__(cls, *args, **kwargs) -> None:
        # This method is called before everything when the model constructor is called
        # It receives the same parameters the constructor gets
        pass

    @classmethod
    def __before_validate__(cls) -> None:
        # This method is called after initializing the model attributes but just before
        # performing the model validations (it will be executed even if 
        # auto_validate = False)
        pass

    @classmethod
    def __once_validated__(cls) -> None:
        # This method is called just after performing the model validations initializing
        # the model attributes but before performing the model validations (it will be
        # executed even if auto_validate = False)
        pass
```

### Non initable attributes

```py
@pymodelio_model
class Model:
    non_initable_model_attr: Attribute[str](initable=False, default_factory=lambda: 'Non initable default value')


# WARNING: This will raise a NameError('non_initable_model_attr attribute is not
#          initable for class Model')
Model(non_initable_model_attr='custom value')


```

## Considerations

When instantiating a model specifying `auto_validate = False`, the model won't be automatically validated during
initialization.

When a class attribute has the annotation `Attribute[<type>]`, it will be transformed into an instance attribute during
the model initialization.

When defining a protected or private model attribute with underscore or double underscore respectively, if that property
can be set by the model constructor, it's value will be obtained from an attribute with the same name but without
underscores. For instance:

```py
@pymodelio_model
class Component:
    __serial_no: Attribute[str]
    _model_name: Attribute[str]

    @property
    def serial_no(self) -> str:
        return self.__serial_no

    @property
    def model_name(self) -> str:
        return self._model_name


component = Component(serial_no='123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000', model_name='ABC123')

print(component.serial_no)  # It will print '123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000'
print(component.model_name)  # It will print 'ABC123'
```

### Customizing the validation process

Custom validators can be implemented by inheriting from the `Validator` class. Even that, there is also other way of
performing custom validations that consists on implementing `_when_validating_attr` method in the defined model. This
method is called after the attribute validator is called (if the attribute does not have a validator, this method is
called anyway).

```py
def _when_validating_attr(self, internal_attr_name: str, exposed_attr_name: str, attr_value: Any, attr_path: str,
                          parent_path: str, pymodel_attribute: Attribute) -> None:
    pass
```

## Available validators

### Validator

A generic validator for any type passed by parameter. It is also capable of validating other models. Validated value
must implement `validate` method in order to be considered a model by this validator.
Other validators inherit from this one.

```py
Validator(expected_type: Union[type, List[type]] = None, nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

### StringValidator

```py
StringValidator(min_len: Optional[int] = None, max_len: Optional[int] = None, fixed_len: Optional[int] = None, regex:
Optional[str] = None, nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

### NumericValidator

```py
NumericValidator(expected_type: type, min_value: Optional[Number] = None, max_value: Optional[
    Number] = None, expected_type: Union[type, List[type]] = None, nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[
    str] = None)
```

### IntValidator

A subclass of NumericValidator specific for integers.

```py
IntValidator(min_value: Optional[int] = None, max_value: Optional[int] = None, nullable: bool = False, message:
Optional[str] = None)
```

### FloatValidator

A subclass of NumericValidator specific for float numbers.

```py
FloatValidator(min_value: Optional[float] = None, max_value: Optional[float] = None, nullable: bool = False, message:
Optional[str] = None)
```

### DatetimeValidator

```py
DatetimeValidator(nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

### DictValidator

```py
DictValidator(nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

### IterableValidator

A validator for an of any type that allows nested models. Validated children must implement `validate` method in
order to be considered a model by this validator.

```py
IterableValidator(expected_type: Union[type, List[type]] = None, elements_type: Union[
    type, List[type]] = None, allow_empty: bool = True, nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

### ListValidator

A subclass of IterableValidator specific for lists.

```py
ListValidator(elements_type: Union[type, List[type]] = None, allow_empty: bool = True, nullable: bool = False, message:
Optional[str] = None)
```

### EmailValidator

```py
EmailValidator(nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

### BoolValidator

```py
BoolValidator(nullable: bool = False, message: Optional[str] = None)
```

## Serialization

pymodelio models implement a `to_dict()` method that serializes the public attributes and properties (defined using
the `property` decorator). For the example at the beginning of this documentation, calling `to_dict()` method in a
computer's instance returns something like:

```py
{
    'cpu': {
        'cores': 8,
        'frequency': 3500,
        'serial_no': '0f3b6ef1-dea3-4cdd-be53-ef85079731c4'
    },
    'disks': [
        {
            'serial_no': '011639e0-82dd-44c0-ba46-3580482c0add',
            'size': 1024
        },
        {
            'serial_no': 'd76474eb-b854-49d1-a0df-917fe8526621',
            'size': 512
        }
    ],
    'rams': [
        {
            'frequency': 1600,
            'serial_no': '8a2639e0-aa0c-450a-8ee1-8dd536578bb8',
            'size': 8
        },
        {
            'frequency': 1800,
            'serial_no': '49140714-263e-4fbb-b366-06916c4e81f5',
            'size': 16
        }
    ],
    'serial_no': 'computer-001'
}
```

If a defined model implements `to_dict()` method, this overridden one will be used instead of the default
one. The signature for overriding this method should be:

```py
def to_dict(self) -> dict:
    return {}  # Returns the serialized model

```

## Let's compare the same code using raw python against using pymodelio

### Using raw python

```py
class RawPythonChildModel:

    def __int__(self, public_child_attr: int) -> None:
        self.public_child_attr = public_child_attr
        self.validate()

    def validate(self) -> None:
        assert isinstance(self.public_child_attr, int), 'public_child_attr is not a valid int'


class RawPythonModel:
    _PUBLIC_ATTR_MIN_VALUE = 0
    _PUBLIC_ATTR_MAX_VALUE = 0

    _PROTECTED_ATTR_FIXED_LENGTH = 5
    _PROTECTED_ATTR_REGEX = '^[A-Z]+$'  # Only capitalized chars

    def __init__(self, public_attr: int, protected_attr: str, private_attr: datetime,
                 child_model_attr: RawPythonChildModel, children_model_attr: List[RawPythonChildModel],
                 optional_attr: dict = None) -> None:
        self.public_attr = public_attr
        self._protected_attr = protected_attr
        self.__private_attr = private_attr
        self.child_model_attr = child_model_attr
        self.children_model_attr = children_model_attr
        self.optional_attr = {} if optional_attr is None else optional_attr
        self.non_initable_attr = []
        self.validate()

    def validate(self) -> None:
        assert isinstance(self.public_attr, int), 'public_child_attr is not a valid int'
        assert self.public_attr >= self._PUBLIC_ATTR_MIN_VALUE,
        f'public_child_attr is lower than {self._PUBLIC_ATTR_MIN_VALUE}'

    assert self.public_attr <= self._PUBLIC_ATTR_MAX_VALUE,
    f'public_child_attr is greater than {self._PUBLIC_ATTR_MAX_VALUE}'


assert isinstance(self._protected_attr, str), '_protected_attr is not a valid str'
assert len(self._protected_attr) == self._PROTECTED_ATTR_FIXED_LENGTH,
f'_protected_attr length is different than {self._PROTECTED_ATTR_FIXED_LENGTH}'
assert re.compile(self._PROTECTED_ATTR_REGEX).match(self._protected_attr) is not None,
'_protected_attr does not match configured regex'

assert isinstance(self.child_model_attr, RawPythonChildModel),
'child_model_attr is not a valid RawPythonChildModel'
self.child_model_attr.validate()

assert isinstance(self.children_model_attr, list), 'children_model_attr is not a valid list'
for child_model in self.children_model_attr:
    child_model.validate()

assert isinstance(self.__private_attr, datetime), '__private_attr is not a valid datetime'

assert isinstance(self.optional_attr, dict), 'optional_attr is not a valid dict'
```

### Using pymodelio

pymodelio model validation errors also give more information about the full path of nested structures. In case of lists,
including the index of the list element where the error occurred.

```py
@pymodelio_model
class PymodelioChildModel:
    public_child_attr: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator())


@pymodelio_model
class PymodelioModel:
    public_attr: Attribute[int](validator=IntValidator(min_value=0, max_value=10))
    _protected_attr: Attribute[str](validator=StringValidator(fixed_len=5, regex='^[A-Z]+$'))  # Only capitalized chars
    __private_attr: Attribute[datetime](validator=DatetimeValidator())
    child_model_attr: Attribute[PymodelioChildModel](validator=Validator(expected_type=PymodelioChildModel))
    children_model_attr: Attribute[List[PymodelioChildModel]](
        validator=ListValidator(elements_type=PymodelioChildModel))
    optional_attr: Attribute[dict](validator=DictValidator())
    non_initable_attr: Attribute[List[str]](initable=False, default_factory=list)
```
